.Dd April 6, 2023
.Dt S6-RC-UPDATE 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-rc-update
.Nd online service database switcher
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl n
.Op Fl v Ar verbosity
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.Op Fl l Ar live
.Op Fl f Ar convfile
.Op Fl b
.Ar newdb
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is an online
.Em service database switcher :
it will replace your compiled service database with another one, and
adjust the live state accordingly.
This allows you to change your set of services without having to
reboot.
.Pp
Live upgrading a service database is not easy, and no fully automated
system can get it right in all cases.
.Nm
will do its best on its own, but it lets the user give it instructions
to handle difficult cases; and rather than implement doubtful
heuristics, it will fail with an error message in situations it cannot
solve.
.Pp
.Nm
analyzes the current live state, the current compiled service
database, and the compiled service database contained at
.Ar newdb
.Po which must be an absolute path
.Pc .
.Pp
Additionally, it can process an optional
.Em conversion file
containing instructions.
.Pp
It computes the necessary service transitions to safely update the
live database.
.Pp
It shuts down the necessary services.
.Pp
It updates the live directory so that
.Ar newdb
becomes the live compiled service database.
.Pp
It starts up the necessary services.
.Ss Transition details
.Nm Ap
s job is to ensure consistency of the live state across a change of
compiled service databases.
To do so, it must make sure that the services that are up at the time
of its invocation are still up after its invocation; but service
definitions in the new compiled may be different from those in the old
one \(em in particular, dependencies may change, or a service can
change types: a oneshot can become a longrun and vice-versa, and an
atomic service can even become a bundle.
.Pp
.Sy Service identity
.Pp
.Nm
examines atomic services, as defined in the old compiled, that are up
at invocation time, and computes what is necessary for the
.Dq same
services, as defined in the new compiled, to be up.
Barring instructions from the conversion file, the service is
.Dq the same
if it has the same name in the new compiled, no matter its type.
.Pp
So, if there is an up oneshot named
.Ql sshd
in the old compiled, and there is a longrun named
.Ql sshd
in the new compiled, then
.Nm
will decide that the new
.Ql sshd
longrun will replace the old
.Ql sshd
oneshot.
If the new compiled defines a
.Ql sshd
bundle instead, then
.Nm
will decide that the old
.Ql sshd
oneshot will be replaced with the contents of the
.Ql sshd
bundle.
.Pp
.Sy Restarts
.Pp
.Nm
tries to avoid needlessly restarting services.
For instance, running it with a new compiled that is an exact copy of
the old compiled should not cause any restarts.
.Nm
will flag a service to be restarted in the following cases:
.Bl -bullet
.It
The service has disappeared in the new compiled.
In this case, the old service will simply be stopped.
.It
The service has changed types: a oneshot becomes a longrun, a longrun
becomes a oneshot, or an atomic service becomes a bundle.
In this case, the old service will be stopped, then the new service
will be started.
.It
The service has a dependency to a service that must restart, or to an
old service that must stop, or to a new service that did not
previously exist or that was previously down.
.It
There is an instruction to restart the service in the conversion file.
.El
.Pp
.Sy Steps
.Pp
After it has decided what services it should restart,
.Nm
will:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Invoke
.Xr s6-rc 8
to stop old services.
.It
Update the live directory with the data from the new compiled.
This is the critical part;
.Nm
should not be interrupted at this point.
It does its best to avoid risking leaving behind an inconsistent
state, but a 100% atomicity guarantee is impossible to achieve.
.It
Adjust pipe names for the existing pipelines, if needed.
.It
Exec into
.Xr s6-rc 8
to start new services.
.El
.Ss The conversion file
The conversion file is used to give
.Nm
instructions when the change of databases is not entirely
straightforward.
Currently, it supports the following features:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Changing the name of a service.
.It
Forcing a restart on a service.
.El
.Pp
.Sy Format
.Pp
The conversion file is a sequence of lines; each line is parsed
independently, there's no carrying of information from one line to the
next.
.Pp
A line is lexed into words by the
.Xr execlineb 1
lexer, which means that words are normally separated by whitespace,
but can be quoted, that
.Ql #
comments are recognized, etc.
.Pp
The first word in a line must be the name of an
.Dq old
atomic service, i.e. an atomic service contained in the current live
database.
The remaining words in the line are instructions telling
.Nm
how to convert that service.
.Pp
.Sy Renaming
.Pp
If the second word in the line is
.Ql -> ,
then the third word in the line must be the new name of the service in
the new database:
.Nm
will then rename it.
It is possible to rename an atomic service to another atomic service
or a bundle, but no matter whether a service is renamed or not,
changing its type will force a restart.
.Pp
.Sy Restarting
.Pp
If the word following either the old name, or a renaming instruction,
is the word
.Ql restart ,
then the service will forced to restart.
.Ss Safely managing and updating compiled databases
The sequence of operations needed to update a database from source to
live can be a little tricky.
It involves:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Compiling the new database without overwriting the live one.
.It
Calling
.Nm
to safely replace the live database.
.It
Making sure the new database will be correctly used at boot time.
.El
.Pp
The FAQ entry at [1] gives a step-by-step explanation on how to proceed.
.Ss Notes
The
.Ar live
argument to the
.Fl l
option, if present, should be the same argument that was given to the
.Xr s6-rc-init 8
invocation when the system was booted.
In other words: it should be the name of the symbolic link pointing to
the real directory containing the live information, not the name of
the real directory.
.Pp
If a longrun service is renamed from
.Ar oldname
to
.Ar newname ,
but not restarted, the
.Xr s6-supervise 8
process in charge of it will still show up in the process list as
.Ql s6-supervise Ar oldname .
This is purely cosmetic and will have no impact on the service;
nevertheless, if you wish to avoid that, simply force a restart on
every longrun you rename.
.Pp
After an
.Nm
invocation, the old compiled service database is left unchanged where
it was, and the new compiled service database is used in-place.
If the machine is rebooted, the
.Xr s6-rc-init 8
invocation will still boot on the old compiled unless more work is
performed.
It is recommended to keep a
.Pa current
symbolic link to the current compiled, to always
.Xr s6-rc-init 8
on
.Pa current ,
and to make
.Pa current
a link to the new compiled right after an
.Nm
invocation.
.Pp
.Nm
is the only way to
.Dq free
the old compiled database for displacement or deletion.
A live compiled database must not be tampered with.
After an
.Nm
invocation, the old database isn't live anymore and can be moved or
deleted; instead,
.Ar newdb
is live.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl n
Dry run.
.Nm
will compute the service transitions, and print the
.Xr s6-rc 8
command lines it would execute to perform those transitions.
It will not actually run them or modify the live database.
.It Fl v Ar verbosity
Be more or less verbose.
Default is 1: warning and error messages will be printed to stderr.
0 silences warnings.
2 adds a bit more information about what
.Nm
is doing.
3 or more is heavy debug output.
.It Fl t Ar timeout
If
.Nm
cannot perform its job within
.Ar timeout
milliseconds, it will exit.
The default is 0, meaning infinite
.Po no timeout
.Pc .
Be aware that timing out and exiting may leave the live database in an
inconsistent state, so use of this option is not recommended.
.It Fl l Ar live
Look for the live state in
.Ar live .
It must be an absolute path.
Default is
.Pa /run/s6-rc .
The default can be changed at compile-time by giving the
.Ql --livedir=live
option to
.Pa ./configure .
.It Fl f Ar convfile
Use the conversion file located at
.Ar convfile .
Default is
.Pa /dev/null ,
meaning no special instructions.
.It Fl b
Blocking lock.
If the database is currently being used by another program,
.Nm
will wait until that other program has released its lock on the
database, then proceed.
By default,
.Nm
fails with an error message if the database is currently in use.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Success.
.It 1
Failure to perform some state transitions, but the database was
switched to
.Ar newdb .
.It 2
Timed out, but the database was switched to
.Ar newdb .
.It 3
Unknown service name in the conversion file.
.It 4
Invalid service database.
.It 5
Wrong service type in the conversion file.
.It 6
Duplicate service in the conversion file.
.It 9
Failure to perform some state transitions, and the database was not
switched.
.It 10
Timed out, and the database was not switched.
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed.
.It 126
Cannot exec into
.Xr s6-rc 8
for the final
.Dq up
transition
.Po
error other than
.Dv ENOENT
.Pc .
.It 127
Cannot exec into
.Xr s6-rc 8
for the final
.Dq up
transition
.Po
executable not found
.Pc .
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Consider the following conversion file:
.Bd -literal
# Simple conversion file
mount-var -> mount-rwfs
httpd restart
sqld -> mysqld restart
.Ed
.Pp
It will rename
.Ql mount-var
to
.Ql mount-rwfs ,
not restarting it if
.Ql mount-var
in the old database and
.Ql mount-rwfs
in the new database have the same type and do not depend on services
that would force a restart.
.Pp
It will restart
.Ql httpd .
.Pp
It will rename
.Ql sqld
to
.Ql mysqld
and make it restart.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-rc-faq 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc-overview 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc-why 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-bundle 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-compile 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-db 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-dryrun 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-fdholder-filler 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-format-upgrade 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-init 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-oneshot-run 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-rc/faq.html#compiledmanagement
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-rc/s6-rc-update.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
