.Dd April 6, 2023
.Dt S6-RC-FDHOLDER-FILLER 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-rc-fdholder-filler
.Nd create anonymous pipes and store them into an
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
.Dq fd-holding
daemon
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl 1
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
<
.Ar longrunnamesfile
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
creates anonymous pipes and stores them into an
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
.Dq fd-holding
daemon.
.Pp
.Nm
is not meant to be used directly; it is used in internal scripts
created by
.Xr s6-rc-compile 8 ,
which are invoked during an
.Xr s6-rc 8
execution.
.Pp
.Nm
expects file descriptor 6 to be open and connected to the
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemon instance managed by
.Xr s6-rc 8
as the internal s6rc-fdholder service.
.Pp
It reads a list of longrun names from its stdin, one per line.
Empty lines are ignored; comments starting with
.Ql #
are ignored; leading whitespace is ignored, but trailing whitespace is
not.
.Pp
For every name longrun that it finds, it creates an anonymous pipe,
and stores both ends of that pipe into the
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
instance, with the
.Pa "" Ns pipe:s6-rc-r- Ns Ar longrun
.Po
for the reading end
.Pc
and
.Pa "" Ns pipe:s6-rc-w- Ns Ar longrun
.Po
for the writing end
.Pc
identifiers, and an infinite timeout.
.Pp
It then exits 0.
.Pp
.Nm
is never meant to be used manually; this page should only be used to
understand s6-rc internals.
.Pp
.Nm
is used in the
.Ql s6rc-fdholder
internal service's run script, right after the
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemon is started; its arguments are the names of all the consumer
longrun services declared in the service database.
.Pp
The point is to create all the pipes for the longrun pipelines in
advance, every time the
.Ql s6rc-fdholder
service is started, and make them available in the fd holder.
This way, pipelined services can simply retrieve their stdin
.Po
for consumers
.Pc
or stdout
.Po
for producers
.Pc
from the fd holder, at any time: even if a pipeline service dies and
is restarted, the pipe will remain valid.
.Pp
If the fd holder itself dies, it will be refilled with a new set of
pipes as soon as it is restarted.
Pipelined services will not be impacted until one of them restarts;
then all the pipeline will restart.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl 1
Write a newline to stdout before exiting after successful operation.
This is used as a notification mechanism.
.It Fl t Ar timeout
If the operation cannot be achieved in
.Ar timeout
milliseconds, abort and report failure.
By default,
.Ar timeout
is 0, meaning infinite.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Success.
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-rc-faq 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc-overview 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc-why 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-bundle 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-compile 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-db 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-dryrun 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-format-upgrade 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-init 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-oneshot-run 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-update 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-rc/s6-rc-fdholder-filler.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
