.Dd April 6, 2023
.Dt S6-RC-INIT 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-rc-init
.Nd initialization tool for the s6-rc system
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl c Ar compiled
.Op Fl l Ar live
.Op Fl p Ar prefix
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.Op Fl b
.Op Fl d
.Ar scandir
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is an initialization tool for the s6-rc system.
It must be run as root, at boot time, prior to any invocation of the
.Xr s6-rc 8
binary.
.Pp
.Ar compiled
.Po
if the
.Fl d
option hasn't been given
.Pc ,
.Ar live
and
.Ar scandir
must be absolute paths.
.Pp
.Nm
expects to find a compiled service database in
.Ar compiled .
It expects to be able to create a directory named
.Ar live .
It also expects that an instance of
.Xr s6-svscan 8
is running on
.Ar scandir .
.Pp
.Nm
initializes the live state in
.Ar live .
It declares
.Ar compiled
as the current service database and sets the state as
.Dq all services down .
.Pp
It then copies verbatim all the service directories declared by
.Ar compiled
into a subdirectory of
.Ar live ,
adds
.Pa ./down
files to the live copies and links those live copies into
.Ar scandir .
It then triggers
.Xr s6-svscan 8 ,
which will pick up the new service directories and start
.Xr s6-supervise 8
processes on them \(em but the service themselves will not be started
right away, because of the
.Pa ./down
files.
.Pp
.Nm
waits for all
.Xr s6-supervise 8
processes to be operational, then exits 0.
.Ss Typical usage
Administrators should invoke
.Nm
once, in their early boot scripts, after
.Xr s6-svscan 8
is functional and ready to supervise longrun services
.Po
and after its catch-all logger, if any, has started
.Pc ,
but before any other initialization.
.Po
The rest of the initialization can be written as a set of s6-rc
services, and performed by just one invocation of the
.Ql s6-rc change
command.
.Pc
.Pp
For instance, when using an init created by s6-linux-init,
.Nm
should be the first command in the stage2
.Po
by default
.Pa /etc/rc.init
.Pc
script.
.Ss Notes
.Bl -bullet
.It
The directory created by
.Nm
will actually be called
.Pa "" Ns Ar live Ns :initial ,
and
.Ar live
will be a symbolic link to that directory.
Users should ignore this, and always refer to the live directory as
.Ar live
in their future
.Xr s6-rc 8
or
.Xr s6-rc-update 8
invocations.
The reason for this behaviour is that
.Xr s6-rc-update 8
creates another, similarly named, directory
.Po
.Pa "" Ns Ar live : Ns Ar suffix
.Pc
and updates the live state by atomically changing the target of the
.Ar live
symlink \(em
so
.Ar live
will not change names, whereas the real directory may.
.It
Similarly, it is recommended that administrators store their compiled
service databases into some versioned directory, and that
.Ar compiled
be a symbolic link to the database currently in use.
This will make it easier to create new compiled databases and switch
them with
.Xr s6-rc-update 8
without having to change the
.Nm
invocation in boot scripts.
.It
After
.Nm
runs,
.Ar compiled
has become the
.Dq live compiled database ,
and must not be tampered with or deleted.
The only way to free it for deletion is to replace it with another
database, via a call to
.Xr s6-rc-update 8 .
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl t Ar timeout
If all
.Xr s6-supervise 8
processes are not up and running after
.Ar timeout
milliseconds,
.Nm
will complain and exit 111.
This is a safety feature so
.Nm
doesn't hang indefinitely on a nonworking installation; normally this
initialization should not take more than a few milliseconds.
.It Fl c Ar compiled
Declare
.Ar compiled
as the current compiled service database for the upcoming live state.
Default is
.Pa /etc/s6-rc/compiled .
.It Fl l Ar live
Store the live state into the
.Ar live
directory, which should not exist prior to running
.Nm ,
but should be under a writable filesystem \(em likely a RAM
filesystem.
Default is
.Pa /run/s6-rc .
The default can be changed at compile time by giving the
.Ql --livedir=live option
to
.Pa ./configure .
.It Fl p Ar prefix
When linking all the service directory into
.Ar scandir ,
prepend the symbolic link names with prefix, i.e. a longrun named
.Ql A
will have its service directory accessible via
.Pa "" Ns Ar scandir Ns / Ns Ar prefix Ns A .
This allows several live directories to be used with a unique scandir
without risking conflicts between longruns with the same name from
different service databases.
This option is only useful if you intend to have several sets of
services independently managed by
.Xr s6-rc 8 ,
with different live directories, all using the same scandir to
supervise their longruns.
The default is no prefix at all, which is good when you only have one
live directory.
.It Fl b
Blocking lock.
If the database is currently being used by another program,
.Nm
will wait until that other program has released its lock on the
database, then proceed.
By default,
.Nm
fails with an error message if the database is currently in use.
.It Fl d
Dereference
.Ar compiled .
Fully resolve the
.Ar compiled
path before declaring it as the current compiled service database for
the upcoming live state.
This allows
.Ar compiled
to be a symlink that can be updated later without impacting the
current live state.
Using this flag in your init scripts'
.Nm
invocation means that it's possible to boot on a compiled service
database whose validity has not previously been guaranteed by a
successful
.Xr s6-rc-update 8
invocation: you should know what you are doing.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-rc-faq 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc-overview 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc-why 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-bundle 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-compile 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-db 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-dryrun 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-fdholder-filler 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-format-upgrade 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-oneshot-run 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-update 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-rc/s6-rc-init.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
