.Dd April 6, 2023
.Dt S6-RC-BUNDLE 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-rc-bundle
.Nd add or delete bundles from a compiled service database without having to recompile it from source
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
help
.Nm
.Op Fl f
.Op Fl l Ar live
.Op Fl c Ar compiled
.Op Fl b
add
.Ar bundlename
.Ar contents...
.Nm
.Op Fl f
.Op Fl l Ar live
.Op Fl c Ar compiled
.Op Fl b
delete
.Ar bundlenames...
.Nm
.Op Fl f
.Op Fl l Ar live
.Op Fl c Ar compiled
.Op Fl b
multiple
.Ar args...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
expects to find a
.Em compiled service database
in
.Ar compiled ;
by default it uses the service database used by the live state in
.Ar live .
.Pp
Depending on the arguments, it adds a bundle definition to this
database, or deletes a bundle definition from it, or performs multiple
additions/deletions.
.Pp
.Nm
is an
.Em offline
tool, i.e. you can run it on any compiled service database without
actually having a live set of services managed by
.Xr s6-rc 8 .
However, if you do have a live set, you can still run
.Nm
on the current database (and it is the default); it won't interfere
with your normal service operation.
.Ss Subcommands
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Ql s6-rc-bundle help
Prints a help message on stdout.
.It Ql s6-rc-bundle add Ar bundlename Ar contents...
Adds a bundle named
.Ar bundlename
to the database, representing the services listed in
.Ar contents .
The arguments in
.Ar contents...
are resolved before the database is modified by the
.Nm
invocation.
.It Ql s6-rc-bundle delete Ar bundlenames...
Deletes bundles listed in
.Ar bundlenames....
.It Ql s6-rc-bundle multiple Ar args...
Performs multiple bundle deletions and additions.
This subcommand is best used in an execline script, because it uses
.Xr execline-block 7 Ns
s.
.Pp
.Ar args...
is composed of:
.Bl -bullet
.It
One block listing bundle names that will be deleted from the database.
.It
Zero or more addition definitions, each of them composed of:
.Bl -bullet
.It
One argument that is the name of the bundle to add.
.It
One block listing the services contained in the new bundle.
The names in the block are resolved before any addition or deletion is
made to the database.
.El
.El
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl c Ar compiled
Operate on a compiled service database in
.Ar compiled
instead of the current live one.
.It Fl l Ar live
Assume the live state is in
.Ar live .
This option is ignored if the
.Fl c
option has been given.
Default is
.Pa /run/s6-rc .
The default can be changed at package compilation time, by giving the
.Ql --livedir=live
option to
.Pa ./configure .
.It Fl f
Force.
.Nm
will not complain when given a nonexisting name to delete
.Po
it will do nothing
.Pc ,
or when given an existing name to add
.Po
it will replace the definition
.Pc .
By default,
.Nm
will complain and exit when asked to delete a nonexistent name or to
add an existing name.
.It Fl b
Blocking lock.
If the database is currently being used by another program,
.Nm
will wait until that other program has released its lock on the
database, then proceed.
By default,
.Nm
fails with an error message if the database is currently in use.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Success.
.It 1
Identifier already exists in service database.
.It 3
Identifier not found in service database.
.It 4
Invalid or corrupted service database.
.It 5
Wrong identifier type for the given command.
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-rc-faq 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc-overview 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc-why 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-compile 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-db 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-dryrun 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-fdholder-filler 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-format-upgrade 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-init 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-oneshot-run 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-update 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-rc/s6-rc-bundle.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
