.Dd April 6, 2023
.Dt S6-RC-ONESHOT-RUN 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-rc-oneshot-run
.Nd executes a oneshot service's
.Pa up
or
.Pa down
script
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl l Ar live
.Op Fl b
up|down
.Ar n
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
executes a oneshot service's
.Pa up
or
.Pa down
script taken from the current live compiled database.
.Pp
.Nm
is not meant to be used directly; it is used in internal scripts created by
.Xr s6-rc-compile 8 ,
which are invoked during an
.Xr s6-rc 8
execution.
.Nm
executes into the
.Pa up
or
.Pa down
script of the
.Ar n Ns
th oneshot service defined in the current compiled service database
(i.e. the compiled linked from the live directory).
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl l Ar live
Use the live directory in
.Ar live .
Default is
.Pa /run/s6-rc ,
or what was given to the
.Ql --livedir
configure option at compile time.
.It Fl b
Blocking lock.
If the service database is currently being used by another program,
.Nm
will wait until that other program has released its lock on the
database, then proceed.
By default,
.Nm
fails with an error message if the database is currently in use.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 3
Invalid service number.
.It 4
Invalid service database.
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed.
.It 126
Cannot exec script.
.It 127
Cannot exec script: executable not found.
.It other exit codes
Returned from the executed
.Pa up
or
.Pa down
script.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-rc-faq 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc-overview 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc-why 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-bundle 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-compile 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-db 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-dryrun 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-fdholder-filler 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-format-upgrade 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-init 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-update 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-rc/s6-rc-oneshot-run.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
