.Dd April 6, 2023
.Dt S6-RC-DRYRUN 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-rc-dryrun
.Nd command wrapper and nullifier
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl v Ar verbosity
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.Ar cmd...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a command wrapper and nullifier, roughly equivalent to the Unix
echo command.
When run, it simply prints its arguments to stdout.
.Pp
.Nm
is not meant to be used directly; it is internally called by
.Xr s6-rc 8
when given the
.Fl n
option.
When a dry-running
.Xr s6-rc 8
instance wants to change the system state by spawning a command
.Ar cmd ,
it spawns
.Ql s6-rc-dryrun Ar cmd
instead, which allows the user to see what would have been done
without actually running the command.
.Pp
.Nm
prints its name, a colon, a space, and the space-separated list of its
arguments to stdout.
.Pp
It then waits for
.Ar timeout
milliseconds, then exits 0.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl v Ar verbosity
If verbosity is 0,
.Nm
will not print anything to stdout.
Default is 1.
.It Fl t Ar timeout
Sleep for
.Ar timeout
milliseconds before exiting.
Default is 1000, but when invoked by
.Xr s6-rc 8 ,
it will be the value of the
.Ar dryruntimeout
argument to the
.Fl n
option.
This is used to simulate a start or stop script that does not complete
immediately.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-rc-faq 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc-overview 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc-why 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-bundle 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-compile 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-db 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-fdholder-filler 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-format-upgrade 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-init 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-oneshot-run 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-update 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-rc/s6-rc-dryrun.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
