.Dd April 6, 2023
.Dt S6-RC-FORMAT-UPGRADE 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-rc-format-upgrade
.Nd transitions a live directory using a database with the old s6-rc format so that it uses a database with the new s6-rc format
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl v Ar verbosity
.Op Fl l Ar live
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.Op Fl b
.Ar newcompiled
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a program that is normally used very rarely: when the s6-rc package
is upgraded, some services are currently managed with
.Xr s6-rc 8 ,
and the database format has changed.
This program transitions a live directory using a database with the
old s6-rc format (the one being replaced) so that it uses a database
with the new s6-rc format.
.Pp
The point is to ensure a smooth transition between different versions
of s6-rc without needing a reboot.
.Pp
.Nm
is very different from
.Xr s6-rc-update 8
and does not duplicate its functionality:
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Xr s6-rc-update 8
updates a live directory to use a
.Em different compiled database ,
compiled from a different source, where services may have changed, be
renamed, etc.
But it can only handle databases with the format that it knows \(em
the format created by the
.Xr s6-rc-compile 8
binary that comes in the same package as
.Xr s6-rc-update 8 .
.It
.Nm
is the opposite: it cannot handle service changes, it can only update
a live directory to use a compiled database corresponding to the
.Em same source
as the compiled database the live directory is currently using.
But it will replace an obsolete compiled database with a compiled
database that uses the new format
.Po
provided both compiled databases come from the same source, and have
just been produced by invocation of different versions of
.Xr s6-rc-compile 8
.Pc ,
ensuring the s6-rc installation can live through database format
changes.
.El
.Pp
.Ar newcompiled
must be an absolute path.
.Pp
.Nm
expects to find a compiled service database with the
.Em new format
in
.Ar compiled .
.Pp
.Ar newcompiled
.Em must
be compiled from the same source database as the current compiled
database currently being used by
.Ar live .
.Nm
then updates the live directory in
.Ar live
so it uses
.Ar newcompiled
as its compiled database.
.Pp
On success, it exits 0.
.Ss Typical usage
.Nm
is only necessary when the database format changes, which only happens
when s6-rc's major version number
.Po
the third number from the right
.Pc
changes.
The correct order of operations is then the following:
.Bl -enum
.It
Make sure your current compiled database is up-to-date with your
source database.
If it's not, update it, by invoking the
.Xr s6-rc-compile 8
and
.Xr s6-rc-update 8
binaries from your
.Em old
s6-rc installation, the ones that understand
the old format.
.It
From the same source, compile a new database with the new format,
using the
.Xr s6-rc-compile 8
binary from the
.Em new
s6-rc package.
.It
Update your live directories with this new database, using
.Nm .
.It
You can now remove the old databases, and delete the old s6-rc package.
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl v Ar verbosity
Be more or less verbose.
Default is 1.
.It Fl t Ar timeout
If all operations have not completed after
.Ar timeout
milliseconds, complain and exit 1.
.It Fl l Ar live
Work with the live state in the
.Ar live
directory.
Default is
.Pa /run/s6-rc .
The default can be changed at compile time by giving the
.Ql --livedir=live
option to
.Pa ./configure .
.It Fl b
Blocking lock.
If
.Ar live
is currently being used by another program,
.Nm
will wait until that other program has released its lock on the
directory, then proceed.
By default,
.Nm
fails with an error message if the live directory is currently in use.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-rc-faq 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc-overview 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc-why 7 ,
.Xr s6-rc 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-bundle 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-compile 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-db 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-dryrun 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-fdholder-filler 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-init 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-oneshot-run 8 ,
.Xr s6-rc-update 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-rc/s6-rc-format-upgrade.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
