.Dd April 7, 2023
.Dt S6-LINUX-INIT-TELINIT 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-linux-init-telinit
.Nd change runlevels
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Ar rl
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
changes runlevels, i.e. changes the system state.
It is normally invoked as
.Pa /sbin/telinit
or just
.Pa init
with an argument.
.Pp
.Nm
may be called with the same options as
.Xr s6-linux-init 8 ,
but it ignores them all.
.Pp
It calls the
.Ql runleveld
.Xr s6-local-service 7
with the
.Ar rl
argument.
This local service executes the user-provided
.Pa runlevel
script, which changes the system state to the state described by
.Ar rl .
.Pp
As a special case, if
.Ar rl
is
.Ql 0
or
.Ql 6 ,
.Nm
then executes into
.Xr s6-linux-init-hpr 8
with the
.Fl p
or
.Fl r
option respectively, for compatibility with sysvinit's
.Em 0
and
.Em 6
runlevels that respectively halt and reboot the machine.
.Pp
Traditional sysvinit only allows integer runlevels, from 0 to 6.
More advanced service managers, like OpenRC or s6-rc, allow the admin
to define alphanumerical runlevels, or
.Em states .
.Nm
does not implement policy; it only makes sure the user-provided
.Pa runlevel
script is called with the
.Ar rl
argument, under a safe and reproducible environment.
The
.Pa runlevel
script can then change the machine state as chosen by the user \(em
typically by invoking the service manager.
.Pp
The 0 and 6 special case has been added because some legacy programs
may assume that calling
.Ql init 0
and
.Ql init 6
respectively halt and reboot the system.
.Pp
The
.Nm
binary is not meant to be called directly by administrators.
Instead, after an
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8
invocation, the
.Pa bin/
subdirectory of the target will contain a
.Pa telinit
symlink to
.Pa s6-linux-init-telinit .
The
.Pa bin/
subdirectory should be copied by the administrator into
.Pa /sbin
for full interface compatibility with sysvinit.
.Pp
When the system is running inside a container
.Po
and the
.Fl C
option has been given to
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8
.Pc ,
the
.Ql runleveld
service is not running, so
.Nm
is not functional and the
.Pa runlevel
script is never invoked.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed.
.El
.Pp
Else,
.Nm
exits with the same exit code as the
.Pa runlevel
script called with the
.Ar rl
argument.
.Pp
If
.Ar rl
is
.Ql 0
or
.Ql 6 ,
in case of success
.Nm
exits 0, but the system shuts down immediately as it returns.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-linux-init-echo 1 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-overview 7 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-quickstart 7 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-why 7 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-hpr 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-logouthookd 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-nuke 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-shutdown 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-shutdownd 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-umountall 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-linux-init/s6-linux-init-telinit.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
