.Dd April 6, 2023
.Dt S6-LINUX-INIT-HPR 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-linux-init-hpr
.Nd trigger the software shutdown procedure or perform an immediate hardware shutdown
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl f
.Op Fl h | Fl p | Fl r
.Op Fl n
.Op Fl d | Fl w
.Op Fl W
.Op Fl i
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
triggers the software shutdown procedure, or, with the
.Fl f
option, performs an immediate hardware shutdown.
It is normally invoked through
.Pa halt ,
.Pa poweroff
or
.Pa reboot
wrappers created by
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8 .
.Pp
If the
.Fl f
option is present, the system is stopped or rebooted immediately.
.Pp
Else, the machine's shutdown procedure is started.
.Pp
The command exits 0; the shutdown procedure happens asynchronously.
.Pp
This interface is the traditional sysvinit interface for the
.Pa halt ,
.Pa poweroff
and
.Pa reboot
programs.
.Nm
must always be called with one of the
.Fl h ,
.Fl p
or
.Fl r
options.
.Pp
When an administrator runs
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8 ,
the resulting directory has a
.Pa bin/
subdirectory that contains
.Pa halt ,
.Pa poweroff
and
.Pa reboot
scripts that call
.Nm
with the relevant option.
The contents of this
.Pa bin/
subdirectory should then be copied by the administrator into
.Pa /sbin
for full interface compatibility with sysvinit.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl f
Force.
The command will not trigger a clean shutdown procedure; it will just
sync the filesystems then tell the kernel to immediately halt,
poweroff or reboot.
This should be the last step in the lifetime of the machine.
.It Fl h
Halt.
The system will be shut down, but the power will remain up.
.It Fl p
Poweroff.
The system will be shut down and the power turned off.
.It Fl r
Reboot.
The system will reboot.
.It Fl n
Do not call
.Xr sync 2
before the hardware shutdown.
The default is to sync, just in case.
This option is only relevant when combined with
.Fl f ;
without it, it has no effect.
.It Fl d
Do not write a wtmp shutdown entry.
.It Fl w
Only write a wtmp shutdown entry; do not actually shut down the
system.
.It Fl W
Do not send a
.Xr wall 1
message to users before shutting down the system.
Some other implementations of the
.Pa halt ,
.Pa poweroff
and
.Pa reboot
commands use the
.Ql --no-wall
long option to achieve this.
.It Fl i
Interactive confirmation request.
The command needs to be launched in a terminal, and will prompt the
user to type the
.Po
short
.Pc
hostname of the machine to be shut down.
On mismatch, the command will abort.
The point is to avoid inadvertently rebooting a remote machine in an
ssh session.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Success.
.It 100
Permanent error
.Po
such as a misuse
.Pc .
.It 111
Temporary error
.Po
such as a system call failure
.Pc .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-linux-init-echo 1 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-overview 7 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-quickstart 7 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-why 7 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-logouthookd 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-nuke 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-shutdown 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-shutdownd 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-telinit 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-umountall 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-linux-init/s6-linux-init-hpr.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
