.Dd April 8, 2023
.Dt S6-LINUX-INIT-LOGOUTHOOKD 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-linux-init-logouthookd
.Nd clean up client's utmp record when it dies
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Pf s6-ipcserver\  Ar socket Nm
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
cleans up its client's utmp record when it dies.
.Pp
.Nm
implements an
.Xr s6-local-service 7
for getty programs that add a utmp record when a user logs in.
.Pp
In the sysvinit model,
.Sm off
.Pa getty
/
.Pa login
.Sm on
and similar programs add a utmp record for every user that logs in,
then
.Xr exec 3
into the user's shell.
At logout time, the shell dies; sysvinit is supervising the
.Pa getty
program, so it's watching the pid, and respawns the
.Pa getty
when the shell dies.
But before respawning the
.Pa getty ,
it cleans up the utmp record, to correctly report that the user isn't
logged in on this terminal anymore.
.Pp
utmp is an old, clunky, insecure system
.Po
unless you're using utmps[1]
.Pc
and it is definitely not pid 1's job to have any knowledge of utmp and
play janitor after
.Pa getty .
.Xr s6-svscan 8
will definitely not do it.
.Pp
Some distributions use versions of
.Xr login 1
that fork the user's shell instead of
.Xr exec 3 Ns
ing it.
When the user logs out, the
.Xr login 1
program cleans up after itself.
This is a better model, but it's not always easy to patch
.Xr login 1
to go from an
.Dq exec the shell
model to a
.Dq fork the shell as a child
model.
.Pp
s6-linux-init comes with a small library which makes it easy for a
distribution to fully support utmp cleanup with an s6 init system if
they so choose.
Before
.Xr exec 3 Ns
ing into the user's shell, the
.Xr login 1
program should just make a call to
.Fn s6_linux_init_logouthook ,
and that's it.
That function will call the
.Ql s6-linux-init-logouthookd
.Xr s6-local-service 7 ,
which will do nothing but wait until the user's shell dies; and when
it happens, the user's utmp record will automatically be cleaned up.
.Pp
The
.Xr s6-local-service 7
implementing logouthook support is automatically created at boot time when the
.Fl L
option has been given to
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8 .
Client-side, though, the various login programs must be patched at the
source level.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Nm Ap
s exit code does not matter, because no program uses it.
However, here's the list for completeness:
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Success, whether or not there was a utmp record to clean up.
.It 1
Connection attempt from a non-root user.
.It 2
Write attempt from a
.Po
misprogrammed
.Pc
client.
.It 111
System call failed.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-linux-init-echo 1 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-overview 7 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-quickstart 7 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-why 7 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-hpr 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-nuke 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-shutdown 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-shutdownd 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-telinit 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-umountall 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/utmps/
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-linux-init/s6-linux-init-logouthookd.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
