.Dd April 7, 2023
.Dt S6-LINUX-INIT-SHUTDOWN 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-linux-init-shutdown
.Nd trigger the system shutdown procedure
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl h Oo Fl H | Fl P Oc | Fl p | Fl r | Fl k
.Op Fl a
.Op Fl t
.Ar sec
.Op Fl i
.Op Fl f | Fl F
.Ar time
.Op Ar message
.Nm
.Fl c
.Op Ar message
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
triggers the system shutdown procedure.
It is normally invoked as
.Pa /sbin/shutdown .
.Pp
If the
.Fl c
option is present, a pending shutdown is cancelled.
.Pp
Else, it plans the shutdown procedure at time
.Ar time .
.Pp
If a
.Ar message
argument has been given,
.Ar message
is broadcast to all logged in users
.Po
as tracked by utmp
.Pc .
.Pp
.Pa shutdown
exits 0.
The shutdown procedure happens asynchronously.
.Pp
The
.Nm
program conforms to the LSB-3.0.0 shutdown interface[1].
.Pp
.Ar time
must follow the following format:
.Op now | Oo + Oc Ns Ar mins | Ar hh : Ns Ar mm
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Ql now
means: trigger the shutdown sequence immediately.
.It
.Pf "" Ar hh : Ns Ar mm
means: absolute time.
Trigger the shutdown sequence when the time
.Pf "" Ar hh : Ns Ar mm
occurs.
If that time has passed for the day, it will wait for the next day.
.Ar hh
must have 1 or 2 digits;
.Ar mm
must have 2 digits.
.It
.Ar mins
or
.Pf + Ns Ar mins
means: relative time.
Trigger the shutdown sequence after
.Ar mins
minutes.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
binary is not meant to be called directly by administrators.
Instead, after an
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8
invocation, the
.Pa bin/
subdirectory of the target will contain a
.Pa shutdown
symlink to
.Pa s6-linux-init-shutdown .
The
.Pa bin/
subdirectory should be copied by the administrator into
.Pa /sbin
for full interface compatibility with sysvinit.
.Pp
The
.Fl f
and
.Fl F
options are only accepted for compatibility.
LSB says they are used to advise the system to skip or enforce a
.Xr fsck 8
after rebooting.
But they are only advisory, and for decades now systems have used
other methods of evaluating whether they should perform filesystem
checks, so these options are largely obsolete nowadays.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl a
Access control.
The shutdown sequence will only be launched if one of the users listed in
.Pa /etc/shutdown.allow
is currently logged in
.Po
as tracked by utmp
.Pc .
.Pa /etc/shutdown.allow
is a text file, one user per line, lines starting with
.Ql #
are comments.
.It Fl t Ar sec
At the end of the shutdown sequence, when it's time to kill all
processes, have a
.Dq grace time
period of
.Ar sec
seconds between the
.Dv SIGTERM
and the
.Dv SIGKILL
.Po
to allow processes receiving SIGTERM to exit cleanly
.Pc .
Default is 3 seconds.
.It Fl k
Warning only.
.Ar message
will be sent to all logged in users, but the shutdown sequence will
not be triggered.
.It Fl h
At the end of the shutdown sequence, halt the system.
The behaviour of this option may be altered with
.Fl H
or
.Fl P .
.It Fl p
At the end of the shutdown sequence, power off the system.
.Po
This option is provided as an extension, it is not required by the LSB
interface.
.Pc
.It Fl r
At the end of the shutdown sequence, reboot the system.
.It Fl f
Ignored.
.It Fl F
Ignored.
.It Fl c
Cancel a planned shutdown
.Po
i.e. cancel the effect of a previous call to
.Pa shutdown
with a
.Ar time
argument that was not
.Ql now
.Pc .
This cannot be used to interrupt a shutdown sequence that has already started.
.It Fl H
This option can only be used in conjunction with
.Fl h .
Ensures the system is halted, not powered off, at the end of the
shutdown sequence.
.Fl Hh
is equivalent to
.Fl h .
.It Fl P
This option can only be used in conjunction with
.Fl h .
Ensures the system is powered off at the end of the shutdown sequence.
.Fl Ph
is equivalent to
.Fl p .
.It Fl i
Interactive confirmation request.
The command needs to be launched in a terminal, and will prompt the
user to type the
.Po
short
.Pc hostname of the machine to be shut down.
On mismatch, the command will abort.
The point is to avoid inadvertently rebooting a remote machine in an
ssh session.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Success.
.It 100
Permanent error
.Po
such as a misuse
.Pc .
.It 111
Temporary error
.Po
such as a system call failure
.Pc .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-linux-init-echo 1 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-overview 7 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-quickstart 7 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-why 7 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-hpr 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-logouthookd 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-nuke 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-shutdownd 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-telinit 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-umountall 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://refspecs.linuxbase.org/LSB_3.0.0/LSB-PDA/LSB-PDA/shutdown.html
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-linux-init/s6-linux-init-shutdown.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
