.Dd April 8, 2023
.Dt S6-LINUX-INIT-UMOUNTALL 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-linux-init-umountall
.Nd unmount all filesystems
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
unmounts all filesystems.
.Pp
.Nm
unmounts all filesystems according to
.Pa /proc/mounts .
It processes
.Pa /proc/mounts
in the reverse order, starting with the most recently mounted
partition and ending with the root filesystem
.Po
.Dq unmounting
the root filesystem means remounting it read-only
.Pc .
.Pp
It makes an exception for the first instances of devtmpfs, proc and
sysfs filesystem types, but not for later instances.
In other words: it does not attempt to unmount
.Pa /dev ,
.Pa /proc
and
.Pa /sys ,
but it will attempt to unmount duplicates of those pseudo-filesystems.
.Pp
.Nm
does not touch
.Pa /etc/mtab .
.Pp
If a filesystem fails to unmount, a warning is printed to stderr, but
.Nm
still attempts to unmount all the other ones.
.Pp
.Nm
is automatically called at the very end of the shutdown procedure, in
.Dq stage 4 ,
i.e. after a
.Dv SIGKILL
has been sent to all the processes on the system, and right before the
system reboots
.Po
or halts, or is powered off
.Pc .
By that point, there is no possible process that could prevent real
file systems from being unmounted.
.Pp
It is likely that some filesystems will still fail to unmount,
typically cgroups or tmpfses.
That's okay: those are pseudo-filesystems, and will not cause data
loss or a fsck if the system shuts down while they are still mounted.
.Pp
Distributions usually provide a
.Xr umount 8
command with a
.Fl a
option to unmount all filesystems.
That command is usually bloated with historical artifacts and relies
on unsafe interfaces, so it was decided not to use it.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Nm
returns the number of errors it encountered when attempting to unmount
the filesystems listed in
.Pa /proc/mounts .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-linux-init-echo 1 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-overview 7 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-quickstart 7 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-why 7 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-hpr 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-logouthookd 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-nuke 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-shutdown 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-shutdownd 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-telinit 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-linux-init/s6-linux-init-umountall.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
