.Dd April 6, 2023
.Dt S6-LINUX-INIT-OVERVIEW 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-linux-init-overview
.Nd overview of s6-linux-init
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Ss Organisation of the package
When installed, the s6-linux-init package provides the following:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Binaries, that are typically installed in
.Pa /bin :
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8
is the main program of the package and is used to create
.Pa /sbin/init
scripts and their supporting environment depending on configuration
parameters given on its command line.
.It
.Xr s6-linux-init-hpr 8
is an implementation of the SysV
.Ql halt ,
.Ql poweroff
and
.Ql reboot
commands;
.Xr s6-linux-init-telinit 8
is an implementation of the SysV
.Ql telinit
command; and
.Xr s6-linux-init-shutdown 8
is an implementation of the
.Ql shutdown
command.
.Xr s6-linux-init 8
is an implementation of stage 1
.Pa /sbin/init ,
but it needs to be given command-line options in order to do what the
user has chosen.
An invocation of
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8
will create proper wrappers for all those commands, named after their
short SysV names; the wrappers are directly usable as turnkey
replacements for SysV commands.
.It
Other binaries are support binaries, not meant to be called directly
by the user.
They are called internally, in scripts created by an
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8
invocation \(em typically in run scripts for early services.
.El
.It
A small library, that for now contains a single symbol,
.Fn s6_linux_init_logouthook ,
intended for distributions using login programs that add utmp entries
for users logging in and expect init to clean up after them when users
log out.
See the
.Xr s6-linux-init-logouthookd 8
page for details.
.It
Skeleton scripts, installed by default in
.Pa /etc/s6-linux-init/skel ;
that location can be changed at build time via the
.Ql --skeldir
configure option.
At
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8
invocation time, the scripts are copied from the skeleton directory to the
.Pa scripts
subdirectory of the directory created by
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8 ,
and the copy is meant to be edited by the user.
The skeleton scripts are commented and examples of interaction with
various service managers are given; it is recommended to review them,
and possibly edit them too.
These scripts are the following:
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Pa rc.init
The script launching the system initialization procedure once stage 1
init is done and
.Xr s6-svscan 8
is safely running as pid 1.
.It Pa rc.shutdown
The script launching the system shutdown procedure when the admin runs a
.Ql halt ,
.Ql poweroff ,
.Ql reboot
or
.Ql shutdown
command.
.It Pa runlevel
The script executing a machine state change at boot time
.Po
normally invoked by
.Pa rc.init ,
towards the default runlevel
.Pc
or when the administrator runs a
.Xr telinit 8
command.
This script is unused in a container.
.It Pa rc.shutdown.final
A script that will be run at the very end of the shutdown procedure,
after all processes have been killed and all filesystems have been
unmounted, just before the system is rebooted or the power turned off.
This script normally remains empty.
.El
.El
.Sh Organisation of the booted system
When a system has booted on an
.Pa /sbin/init
program created by
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8 ,
the following invariants are met:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Global resource limits, if any, are set on the system.
.It
A tmpfs is mounted on
.Pa /run
\(em that location can be changed at build-time via the
.Ql --tmpfsdir
option to configure.
The rest of this document assumes it is
.Pa /run .
.It
.Xr s6-svscan 8
is running as pid 1 on the
.Pa /run/service
.Xr s6-scan-directory 7 .
.It
Every process on the system is running with at least the environment
defined in the
.Pa /etc/s6-linux-init/current/env
envdir.
The
.Pa /etc/s6-linux-init/current
location can be changed at
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8
invocation time via the
.Fl c
option.
.It
Some early services are defined in
.Pa /run/service ,
and running.
They are not seen by the service manager and should remain up all the
time, until the machine shuts down: they are considered a part of the
init system, even if they're not process 1.
Apart from
.Xr s6-linux-init-shutdownd 8 ,
which is necessary for the machine (or container) to respond to
shutdown requests, they are only present depending on the
configuration, and different
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8
invocations will yield different sets of services.
The services are picked from this list:
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Ql s6-linux-init-shutdownd
The shutdown manager, running the shutdown sequence in a reproducible
environment when a shutdown command is executed, then performing the
last shutdown steps.
.It Ql s6-svscan-log
The catch-all logger.
.It Ql s6-linux-init-runleveld
The runlevel manager, running the runlevel script in a reproducible
environment when a
.Xr telinit 8
command is executed.
.It Ql s6-linux-init-logouthookd
A local service performing utmp record cleanup duty for patched login
programs.
.It Ql s6-linux-init-early-getty
The early getty, allowing the user to login even if
.Pa rc.init
fails early.
.It Ql utmpd
A service performing utmp access when utmps[1] is used.
.El
.El
.Ss Integration with the service manager
The s6-linux-init package's duties stop where the service manager's
start.
.Xr s6-linux-init 8
simply brings the system up to the point where it is stable and
operational enough for the service manager to take over; and at
shutdown time,
.Xr s6-linux-init 8
just tells the service manager to bring down the services, and then
performs the last steps of the shutdown: killing all the remaining
processes, unmounting the file systems and halting/powering
off/rebooting the machine.
.Pp
All the interactions between
.Xr s6-linux-init 8
and the service manager are configurable: they happen in the
.Pa rc.init ,
.Pa rc.shutdown
and
.Pa runlevel
scripts.
Examples are provided in the skeleton scripts, that you should review
and edit.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-linux-init-echo 1 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-quickstart 7 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-why 7 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-hpr 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-logouthookd 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-nuke 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-shutdown 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-shutdownd 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-telinit 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-umountall 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/utmps/
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-linux-init/overview.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
