.Dd November 7, 2023
.Dt S6-SETLOCK 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-setlock
.Nd take a lock on a file, then execute into another program
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl n | N
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.Op Fl d Ar fd
.Op Fl r | w
.Ar file
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
creates
.Ar file
if it does not exist and opens it for writing.
.Pp
It locks
.Ar file .
If it cannot take the lock for any reason, it exits 1.
.Pp
It executes into
.Ar prog... .
.Pp
.Nm
leaks an open file descriptor into the
.Ar prog
execution.
This is intended: the fd holds the lock, which is released when
.Ar prog
exits.
.Ar prog
must not touch fds it does not know about; by default it has no need
to know the descriptor that holds the lock.
But if you need to officialize the presence of the lock in
.Ar prog ,
that's where the
.Fl d
option comes in.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl n
Nonblocking lock.
If
.Nm
cannot acquire the lock, it will exit 1 immediately.
.It Fl N
Blocking lock.
.Nm
will wait until it can acquire the lock.
This is the default.
.It Fl t Ar timeout
Timed lock.
If
.Nm
cannot acquire the lock after
.Ar timeout
milliseconds, it will exit 1.
.It Fl r
Shared lock.
Other shared locks on the same file will not prevent the lock from
being acquired (but an exclusive lock will).
.It Fl w
Exclusive lock.
This is the default.
.It Fl d Ar fd
Make the lock visible in
.Ar prog
on file descriptor
.Ar fd .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6lockd 8 ,
.Xr s6lockd-helper 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-setlock.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
