.Dd April 6, 2023
.Dt S6-LINUX-INIT-ECHO 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-linux-init-echo
.Nd writes arguments to stdout
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl n
.Op Fl s Ar sep
.Ar args...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
writes its arguments args to stdout, separated with spaces.
.Pp
Strange, and appalling, as it may seem for such a simple task, there
is no way to ensure that the
.Ql echo
program will behave consistently
from Unix system to Unix system \(em and even from Linux distribution
to Linux distribution.
Despite there being a standard[1] for it, the
.Ql echo
commands in GNU coreutils, busybox, toybox, sbase, and other
implementations basically all exhibit different behaviours.
Every shell has a built-in
.Ql echo
command, that fails to follow the POSIX standard.
.Ql echo
is the prime example of the consequences of the blatant disregard of
early Unices for cross-system compatibility, and its followup as a
turf war between GNU and the rest of the Linux world.
As a distribution-agnostic software developer, it is ironically
impossible to rely on a definite behaviour of the
.Ql echo
command on every supported system, and that is why s6-linux-init
provides its own implementation.
Fortunately, it is very easy to do so, with minimal overhead.
.Pp
This command is an exact duplicate of the
.Xr s6-echo 1
command provided in the s6-portable-utils package.
It was decided not to have a dependency from s6-linux-init to
s6-portable-utils: that dependency would arguably be a higher cost
than the small amount of code duplication.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl n
Do not output a trailing newline.
.It Fl s Ar sep
Separate arguments with the
.Ar sep
character instead of a space.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Success.
.It 100
Permanent error
.Po
such as a misuse
.Pc .
.It 111
Temporary error
.Po
such as a system call failure
.Pc .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-linux-init-overview 7 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-quickstart 7 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-why 7 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-hpr 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-logouthookd 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-maker 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-nuke 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-shutdown 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-shutdownd 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-telinit 8 ,
.Xr s6-linux-init-umountall 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/utilities/echo.html
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-linux-init/s6-linux-init-echo.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
